This is the continuation of the code challenge that we started in the previous video.
So now we're starting with exercise four and there's six exercises in total.
So we are almost ready to do the logit lens analysis with Bert.
The thing is that the way that I taught you to do a logit lens analysis in the previous video was maybe
not entirely the best way to explain it.
Here's the thing it's not just that you multiply the intermediate layers activations by the embeddings
matrix.
Instead, what you really need to do is push the activations through the final part of the model, the
final module in the model.
Now the thing is, in an open AI GPT architecture, the final module at the end of the model is nothing
more than one embeddings matrix.
That's it.
So that approach actually did work for GPT two, but it won't really work here with Bert.
I mean, the multiplication will work, but it's not going to achieve the appropriate result.
And that's what I am showing here.
And that's basically the goal of this exercise.
So the final like paragraph, if you will, of the GPT model this is GPT two is it contains only this
one linear object, just this one linear layer.
And that means we can just pull out the weights and use matrix multiplication.
However, the final paragraph of the Bert model, that's what this screenshot shows, is not just this
decoder, it's a sequence of transformations and normalizations.
Now the thing is, in the full model, all of the weights are trained to work with this final head of
the model, including these intermediate activations.
So this is like the UN embeddings section.
It's the embeddings module.
It's not just this one matrix.
And that's basically what you are going to do in this exercise.
So you want to actually make a token prediction in the correct way and also in the incorrect way.
Okay.
So that was all just a bit of background.
Now let me give you some more detail.
So first run a forward pass with one token masked out.
I chose to mask out the word way exactly the same as in exercise one.
Only this time we really do want the Hidden States activations, because you want to test the logit
lens analysis on one transformer block.
Okay, so the wrong way to do it is to extract the weights matrix from this final decoder module, this
final decoder layer, and then multiply the activations.
That's matrix A of some intermediate transformer block layer by the transpose of this embeddings matrix.
So that's the wrong way.
The correct way to do it is to push the activations from.
So one of the hidden states activations through this entire module, this entire layer of the model.
And so that you could do by grabbing the predictions and then pushing the activations through the predictions.
So I used a layer towards the end, I think it was layer 21 out of 24.
I forget exactly.
But anyway, when you plot the z squared logits for both the correct and the incorrect approaches,
you will see quite a difference between these results.
In fact, the z scores for the incorrect way almost never even get above three.
So this kind of just looks like a distribution of noise.
But when you do it the correct way, you'll get a much more sensible result with a ginormous Z score.
As you know, almost 30 standard deviations away from the mean of the distribution.
So I hope that makes sense.
Now you should pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Here I am printing out the model architecture again.
This is already printed out at the top of the script.
I just wanted to have it here again as a reminder for how to access these different layers here.
Okay then.
This is just a convenience variable.
This is the number of hidden states that we're going to get.
It's the number of layers in the encoder part which is this corresponds to the number of transformer
blocks.
And of course you know it is plus one for the initial embeddings from the hidden States.
Okay, so now I'm running a forward pass.
Here we are getting the hidden states, and I have no idea why this code is repeated here.
I think I will just delete this.
That's probably just a little mistake that I have that in there twice.
Okay, so there's 25 hidden states, layers in total, 24 transformer blocks.
And the shape of the hidden states for this one particular layer, this is just for conformation is
one sequence 14 tokens and 1024 embeddings dimensions.
Okay.
So here let me actually go back up here.
So we have model dot predictions decoder.
And then we can get the weights out of this.
And that is what this does over here.
So this is just the embeddings matrix.
And then I transpose it here I'm getting the activations from hidden states layer minus three.
So out of 25 it's layer 22.
And then here I multiply the activations that I grabbed here by the embeddings matrix transpose that
I extracted here, as I mentioned in the slides a moment ago.
This does work for GPU architectures, but that's because in the GPT architecture, all of this module,
this entire layer here is literally just one layer.
Okay.
So let's see.
So there we do that.
Bring it back to the CPU.
And now here I'm doing it the correct way.
So I take the activations I push them through this entire module here.
All of the business that's inside model predictions.
And then of course I detach that and bring that back to the CPU.
And now here when we do the visualization, we can already see that this does not give us a sensible
result.
The predicted token here is hash.
Hash wives.
That's not correct.
And also when you look at the distribution, I mean, this does not look like the model has really picked
a specific token.
And the reason is that what we're doing here is removing a lot of important transformations that the
model has learned to get from logits to the vocab dimensionality.
So here it works quite well.
You have been patiently waiting a very long time to finally get to the logit lens analysis.
I appreciate your patience, and I hope you feel that you learned a lot on the way to exercise five.
So this exercise involves implementing the analysis, the logit lens, and doing some visualizations.
And then we'll make a heat map of the results in the next exercise.
So loop through all of the layers in the model.
So all the transformer blocks.
Of course, you can ignore the initial embeddings, uh, matrix and also loop through all the tokens
in the sequence to mask them out and get hidden states activations from the forward pass.
Then you should Z score all of the activations from each layer for each of the masked tokens, and store
that Z score for whatever is the maximum predicted token.
So this is essentially just combining what you have already done in previous exercises.
So just a lot of copy pasting code to implement exercise five at the first and the final layers you
can print out the predicted text.
This is also what we did in the previous video.
So here you see, the way you do anything is the way you do everything.
And then it will be interesting to see what the predicted text looks like at the first transformer block.
And at the final transformer block.
Next you can make line plots that look like this.
Now in this graph, every line corresponds to a different layer.
So a different transformer block and the y axis is the z score of the maximum token at each position.
And the x axis corresponds to the token position.
Now I've labeled the text here on the x axis ticks according to the original text, and that's for your
reference.
Of course, for each of the layers, the predicted words are not necessarily going to be the actual
words from the original text.
So to see what those predicted words are, you would need to do a different visualization like a text
heatmap.
And we'll get to that in the next exercise.
But here the goal with this visualization is to see that the z scores generally increase as we get deeper
into the model, I will have a few more things to say about this, including a short discussion about
whether it's appropriate or even valid to draw lines between these points here.
But anyway, I will get to that when I switch to code.
The final part of this exercise is to visualize these exact same results, but in an image.
So all of the data in this image here are exactly the same as the data for the lines in this plot.
Here it's just visualized in a different way.
So each row here corresponds to a layer, and the color corresponds to the z score of the predicted
token from each layer.
And for each token position.
I think that both of these representations have advantages, but also potential for misinterpretation.
So I think it's useful for you to see both of these visualizations, and then in your own investigations,
you have a bigger arsenal of visualization methods.
All right.
Now is your time to pause the video and work through this exercise.
And now I will switch to code and continue this discussion.
I will store two sets of results in two matrices.
So I have the z scores for the predicted tokens, the masked out tokens.
And that is the size of the hidden states by the number of tokens in the text.
And then the actual predicted tokens.
And that's also the same size.
But here we can just use integers because these are just integer tokens.
Okay here I have a for loop.
This is basically copied from exercise four.
I think your exercise three I forget which exercise is copied from, but uh, yeah, you you remember.
Okay, so I make a copy of all of the tokens, and then I replace one of the tokens with the mask.
Actually, in this case, I'm actually moving the tokens to the GPU only when I'm inputting these token
sequences into the model.
Okay, get the outputs.
Hidden states equals true.
And now once I have all of the hidden states activations for this particular token, this particular
masked token, now I can loop over all of the layers.
And again all of this code is code you've seen in earlier exercises.
So here I get the activations.
Here I get the apply the logit lens.
And then I'm getting the maximum token from the logits and z scoring over here.
So I store the predicted token.
And I also store the z score of the predicted token.
If you did this slightly differently, that's also fine, for example, in the previous video.
So actually two videos ago when I introduced the logit lens method, I didn't actually store the token
index.
I was storing the actual token text.
You could also do it that way.
Totally fine.
Uh, let's see.
Here are the predictions.
So at the first transformer block we have fellowship accreditation, blah blah blah blah blah.
Lots of fellowships, nothing whatsoever to do with the actual text.
The model is doing horrible here.
It's getting it completely wrong.
And then by the final layer, this you've seen before, the way you do it, the way you do, not technically
really 100% correct, but pretty close.
And it certainly gets the right idea of the missing tokens.
And by the way, also slight difference from a couple videos ago.
There I was.
Only I didn't even run this analysis for the first embeddings layer here.
I actually ran it over all of the layers.
But then here I'm only looking at the predicted tokens from the first layer, so I'm still ignoring
the embeddings matrix and just looking at the first transformer block.
Multiple correct ways to set up these kinds of analyses.
So here I plot a line for each of the layers.
And with this here, I'm just skipping the first and the final token, because that corresponds to the
CLS and Sep tokens at the beginning and at the end.
And I don't really care about those for this visualization.
Okay.
So I briefly mentioned whether it was appropriate to have lines in between the dots here.
Now the thing is in statistics and data visualization, if you have a line connecting to individual
points, then you are assuming that there are values that you're linearly interpolating between those
two points.
And there would be a value that would be somewhere between way and you.
And that would have a Z score of 11.
Now the thing is that is that's just doesn't work for discrete categories like this.
There is nothing in between way and you, they are just discrete, categorically different.
They are sorted, they're ordered.
But there's no like way point five and you point five that you can mix together.
So technically formally in terms of data visualization the lines here are kind of inappropriate.
But I think that it just doesn't really look as good with without the lines.
I think it's harder to visualize what's really going on here without the lines.
So in my humble opinion, it is fine to violate statistical rules, data visualization rules when the
advantage of when the gain in interpretability Outweighs the potential for misinterpretation.
Okay, that's really all I want to say about that.
What you do see in general is as we get deeper into the model, the Z scores.
So the separation of the predicted token versus the rest of the tokens increases.
Okay.
And then here I have exactly the same data but now shown as an image.
So here again you can see that as we get deeper into the model we get better and better separation of
the predicted tokens compared to the, uh, the rest of the distribution of tokens.
It's also pretty interesting to see which this visualization highlights that this visualization doesn't
show as well that some of these tokens are the model was separating them earlier compared to other tokens.
So for example, this token do uh, took the model, you know, maybe like 18 layers before it got really
great separation here versus this one.
The the model had a much easier time earlier in the model earlier in the transformer blocks really popping
out this predicted token from the rest of the distribution.
This is the final exercise in this code challenge.
You do not need to do any new analyses.
You just need to create this heat map.
So that's going to involve finding some other notebook where you created a heat map for the logit lens,
and then copying it and making some minor modifications for this model size and this text sequence length.
And again, the color behind each token corresponds to the min max scaled z transformed activations.
Now, because this is an entire matrix, there are actually a few different ways that you can min max
scale the data.
To.
For example, you can min max scale the entire matrix, or you can scale the matrix row wise, or you
can scale the matrix column wise.
And by that I mean you could have within each column here.
So within each token you could scale all of these data to go from 0 to 1.
Or you could scale within the row or you could scale the entire matrix.
There's no single right or wrong.
And you can make arguments for multiple ways of doing it.
You might be able to guess just from looking at this graph, the way that I set up the min max scale.
But as I mentioned, you can explore different ways when you switch to code, which is what you should
do now.
I min max scaled the entire matrix so I get from the whole matrix I get one minimum and one maximum.
So that means from the entire matrix there will be one value with zero one value of one, and everything
else is in between.
Okay.
And then, uh, yeah.
Here you just see those results visualized.
So from that matrix I'm just flattening it out.
This is just for visualization.
Here we get zero and then we go all the way up to the maximum predicted token is going to have a value
of one okay.
So uh, all of this code here to do the visualization for the heat map is exactly the same as, uh,
the video where I introduced the logit lens analysis.
That was two videos ago.
And yeah, as I mentioned there, it's the code here is a little bit simpler compared to a regular text
heat map, uh, because of the matrix organization.
But otherwise, yeah, I think the code is, uh, confusing the first time you see it.
But once you work through it line by line, it gets a bit easier.
Mainly the changes that I made from a couple videos ago was just to modify some of these little parameters
here, just so that it looks a bit better with this length of a token sequence and this number of layers.
So it's pretty interesting to see that the model is basically doing its complete junk.
I mean, this is total absolute garbage here in the beginning.
And then it kind of seems like the model just gets it right.
So somewhere around layer.
I don't know, 13, 14, 15 ish.
The model just seems to suddenly snap into getting the final predictions, which are sometimes correct,
sometimes incorrect.
But even when they're incorrect, the model just picked it here.
And then it stayed with that prediction for basically half of the model.
A few final take home points.
One is that it's really important for you to have at least a good, solid, basic conceptual and mathematical
understanding of how these different analyses work, and how different companies and AI organizations
put their models together.
And that's because although most analyses will work on most models, there are often little modifications
that need to be made.
And if you do not have an understanding of the analyses and you're just copying and pasting code, the
risk of making mistakes or misinterpretations or bugs that you don't know how to fix is just really
high.
A feature of models that I would also like to highlight here is that there are some quantifications
of internal calculations and representations that suggest smooth transitions across the layers, whereas
other analyses, like what you saw here suggest more of like a discontinuous or a sudden phase transition.
Now, it's perhaps not so surprising that we find a result like this with the logit lens method, because
we forced the model to make a categorical prediction, whereas the internal activations are continuous
measures.
But the fact that different analyses can seem to reveal qualitatively different conclusions.
That seems confusing and weird, but it actually is very typical.
It's a typical phenomenon that happens with very complex systems.
Okay.
And then the final point that I will mention here is something I mentioned at the beginning of the previous
video when I introduced you to the logit lens, and that is that.
Yeah, I've just shown you one outcome measure which is categorically forcing a token prediction.
But there's lots of other things you can do with this logit lens approach.
If you're interested, you can read more about it in the link that I provided in the previous code file
for the previous video.